hi everyone how's everyone doing today
are you staying warm
okay
so
um i'm nitia rough and this is my super
guest ali gotzi
so let me go back to the beginning
let to introduce myself i had the open
source office at comcast
we connect people to
incredible entertainment experiences as
well as
to internet services
and i also chair the board of the linux
foundation uh which is the home of lena
store walls and
linux and hundreds and hundreds of open
source projects and it's kind of at the
center of open source so what we'll do
is i'll go through a few slides to kind
of set the stage of open source momentum
that's happening
both in terms of adoption as well as
money going into open source
um and then i'll
discuss some of what databricks is doing
which is so magical managing open source
in
a very uh scalable and uh enterprise way
and then we'll go into a lot of great
questions and answers so you can
actually get a chance to know what to do
if you are an open source based company
so
i i really don't need to tell you that
this is the 30th year of the birth of
linux so about 30 years ago a young
finnish student
called lena storwalz released the micro
kernel for linux
you know through a mailing list and
people
started
adopting it contributing to it etc to
the point where today
um linux is everywhere uh right
and and frankly it's in all of the
different markets it's in all the way
from super computing to ai to
internet of things to embedded devices
name it and it's
there and open source has really become
one of the most successful enablers of
global innovation in history
in every part of infrastructure in every
part of
user experience you have some amazing
open source contributions
then you look at the kind of money
that's going into open source and you
realize that back in the day you know in
1990 2000
you only talked about companies like red
hat
and red hat used to dominate the
valuations for open source based
companies and then you fast forward to
and 2020 and you find that
you know red hat is only 10
of valuations
valuations today of open source based
companies are
close to 300 billion 400 billion and
climbing
and you have some amazing exits like
confluent and then you have
incredible
unicorns in the open source based
business like data breaks
like confluent like hashicorp
and it goes on and on and it's just
beginning
and i'm so glad to speak to databricks
because databricks not only started out
in the amp labs
of
uc berkeley
based on the apache spark
but they continued to innovate continue
to open source their projects
like
delta lake
like ml flow and coal as and it's so
important to discuss how do you balance
growing a business for the enterprise in
the data and the ml space
whilst also
um you know working with community and
open sourcing and keeping that
innovation engine going
so with that framework in mind i'm going
to
um i'm going to fast here so i'm going
to ask ali some questions here
ali um
you know it's uh it's very important to
start a company right
and you all did so many things right
when you started an open source-based
company like databricks can you share
some of the things you did which are
still helping you succeed today
yeah i mean for us one thing that was
really important in the first couple
years
was focusing on the community around the
open source projects um
at that time spark wasn't very well
known uh so really what we were doing
the first
you know five six people in the company
and then the honestly first 20 employees
was we basically were doing developer
relationships we were we would rent a
car from enterprise and we would get on
101 and we would go to all kinds of
startups and companies here
uh you know in the south bay and
elsewhere and we'd give talks on spark
and sort of evangelize the technology
and build basically ground up
uh community around these open source
projects and that was super important
you know it so we weren't focused on
revenue we weren't focused on making
money or anything like that we just
focused on how do we get twitter or
facebook or you know airbnb or one of
these companies to adopt the technology
and we were really going after the
developers we weren't going after the
suits or you know the people high up
with fancy titles it was just the
developers and we would win them one by
one and would answer the questions and
they would contribute and join these
projects
that was really really important that
was sort of the beginnings of the
you know
the whole figuring out how you get these
projects to succeed and we've carried
that with us today that's incredible
because community is so important why is
community so important to the success of
an open source based business
yeah that's a great question um
basically the the
idea is that you create these basically
it's for the business model in some
sense right what happens is you get
millions of millions of developers
around the world um you know we actually
have 30 million downloads of these
projects just alone every month so it's
30 million downloads and of course
that's not people but
uh
it's almost like a b2c thing right in in
business to business enterprise uh
you know companies like us you don't see
millions of customers or so on right uh
but with open source you have that
ability to do that and it's a community
that does that and once you have the
community um you know you're it's it's
kind of you're a little bit unbeatable
and if you can figure out how to do it
again and again
then you have something that's unique um
you know unfortunately in many cases it
ends up being
founders create an open source project
they evangelize it lots of people use it
then the founder becomes ceo or cto or
maybe retires and so on
and then the company only has that one
open source project that they're
monetizing but in the in our case we
wanted to continue doing it we wanted to
figure out what was it we did right in
the early days so we can repeat this and
continue building this momentum behind
these projects
and and often the developers the focus
on developers are so important because
developers often become your first
adopters then they become evangelists
and they are the ones who kind of scale
it in an enterprise right how what is
that process from developer adoption to
enterprises paying attention to it yeah
before open source
in enterprise business what you would do
is you would get the meetings you would
sort of explain what you have
and then they would say well okay let's
do a proof of concept
let's get the legal team in let's get
the security team and then it could take
three months before you even have the
poc started and then once the poc starts
they're starting to evaluate it with
open source you have people in the room
that will raise their hand and say i
know what spark is yeah i've already
used it i downloaded it on my laptop at
home i know how this delta pro i'm a big
fan i know what this is uh so that moves
things along much faster and also
internally the
let's call them the people in suits uh
who need to who maybe have the budget
and make the decision on are we going to
really work with databricks when they
look internally and say can we trust
these guys you'll have that person
internally say yeah yeah i know who they
are i know these projects you know
here's how that works well how does this
compare with that other thing well i'll
tell you because i know i've used it
already because i downloaded a free
version of it um so that's why that's
important that's one but there's also
you know there'll be ebooks there'll be
books there'll be courses massive online
courses there'll be experts out there
also if a company needs to hire someone
that has know-how about any of these
projects they don't have to just come to
the database and say hey can we buy
professional services they can just go
and hire from the community uh so
that's another reason why this is
important the final is the final reason
which is more egotistical for databricks
if you want to hire really amazing
engineers it's hard now right it's
there's
there's tough competition for you know
good engineers from google facebook and
these companies
if you if you're doing open source
development within your company you can
attract much better engineers because
you can tell them come here work here
you can work on these projects and you
can put these on your cv and when your
next employer asks you what did you work
on instead of saying hey it's secret
confidential i can't break my
you know nda you can just say oh i
actually worked on delta lake you can
check it out it's online go
look at my contributions so it's also a
way to attract talent i i think it's
it's magical frankly because of all the
stuff that you said the
the millions of people who adopted the
advocacy that they do for you on your
behalf and then the fact that you have a
ready-made uh you know skilled workforce
that you can bring in and the trust and
the reputation that precedes you know
the company coming before it you also
did something very very good which is
you chose a name for the company that's
different than the project
and
why
yeah actually there was a big debate
internally um you know we were engineers
so we actually made a long list of
different names we picked and we scored
them and you know with a bunch of
research
and uh but one of the things was um
many of the or several of the founders
wanted to call it you know spark
something at that time it was kind of in
vogue to pick the same name as the
project yes you know there was docker
and they had like the project docker and
uh and because the project was known
spark was well known the idea was well
we'll get a lift from the
the
community they'll know where to spark
folks um but from early on we said look
technology comes and goes
spark in 10 years
will have probably aged
and hopefully we come up with other
innovations so let's pick a name that
separates the the
the company from the open source
technology and hopefully we can continue
coming up with maybe we'll come up with
something that's better than spark and
we can even you know
we don't need to sort of just
uh be attached to it in fact i think one
of the examples someone used uh in the
early days was google at the time when
google started they had an algorithm
called pagerank that was how they would
sort the
uh you know how they would rank the
different pages and they could do that
better than the competition alta vista
and yahoo and so on uh but we're saying
nobody knows google as page rank or the
page rank company these days it's
something much bigger so we said let's
pick something that's independent and we
picked databricks because we thought you
know we'll
build one brick at the time you know in
the data stack as we're building it so
so it was actually one of the important
decisions early on i i think so i it
separates you from the project but yet
and gives you a lot of runway and an
umbrella term to kind of innovate
continuously which you have done i mean
you've gone from data warehousing all
the way to an entire workflow for
machine learning which is such a hard
problem to solve i know because i talk
to our machine learning folks at comcast
and and they love
working with you all so another thing
you did right right from the start was
you went with a managed service or
you know spark as sas
why i mean those days on-prem was so
popular why did you choose to do sas
based model yeah that's a great question
we thought a lot about this um we were
not particularly
fond of the open source on-prem model
which is largely services and support
around open source projects we thought
there was one example of a good one
which was red hat but there weren't many
other examples that were doing well and
now we've seen red hat you know also you
know did not survive as an independent
company
and the reason for it was i mean we
analyzed it and what we saw at that time
hadoop was really popular and we were
analyzing the hadoop vendors and their
business model was like the red hat
model on premise uh and what discouraged
us was we saw that they would the first
you know vendor at the time cloudera
would go in they would sell this uh
you know supporting services around
hadoop
the customer would build these big data
lakes with data in it but then they
would find that a year later they can
get cheaper support and services from a
next vendor at that time it's called
hortonworks they're not around anymore
and so they would get cheaper support
from them and then two years after that
they would maybe
hire some people to the support
themselves or maybe they would just
outsource it to some other company
but they would keep the software
because just open source free
so the business models were not robust
uh in the sense that really
you were really selling services
masqueraded
as uh software um the sas model we were
super excited about uh we looked a lot
at aws amazon web services and we
thought they had done an amazing job
they basically offered lots of different
open source technologies as a service
and what you do then instead of just
as a customer just buying you know
getting free software installing it
managing yourself on your own data
center you're actually renting it right
and you're delegating the security the
reliability all the difficult things
to that vendor and that's just much
better business model it's uh you know
you have less people turning and you're
not in the business of doing support and
services you're in the business of
automating
uh problems away instead of just adding
people to it
and frankly speaking we thought that uh
some of these vendors
they might not be incentivized to make
the software great because they make a
lot of money by sending
professionals you know services so we
wanted to make sure we're incentivizing
ourselves to do things uh in an
automated sort of way so this became
super important to us so we host this
software for you we'll take care of all
the difficult parts like we'll make sure
it's secure if you have a data breach
it's our fault that's not the case on
premises it's the it team that's
responsible for data bridge we make sure
it has good slas we make sure that it's
super fast and optimized and we'll take
care of the upgrades which actually is
really painful yes right it's like you
know people take that for granted but
upgrading to the next version of the
software could take a year you could
have outages we'll take care of that for
you
and you know you kind of almost lease
the software from us
i recently started a solution first
on-prem and it took us forever just to
operationalize it and install it and get
the configuration right and manage it
and we didn't have the team to do it so
i then moved to a sas based model and it
was incredibly helpful
so um this is the age of the public
cloud and a lot of isv isvs really
struggle to compete with public cloud
um
how did you do so well i mean how did
you manage to compete successfully and
also partner with all the public cloud
vendors yeah i mean it's the fact that
we started in the cloud from the
beginning
i kind of joke and say that uh running
software in the cloud as a service
it's kind of like if someone told you
you had to stand on your hands for the
rest of your lives right it's really
hard like most of us can do it yeah but
if your life depended on it you'd figure
it out and you get good at it but it
would take you a while to learn right to
not use your legs at all and just
walk in your hands that's how it is
running software in the cloud
so
what we think is
a lot of vendors develop great open
source software they sell it on-prem
they haven't yet learned how to walk on
their hands and then they hear from
their customers that oh we want to run
this stuff in the cloud so then i try to
maybe offer the cloud version let's try
to explore walking on their hands but
then they realize wow this is really
really hard and by the way the cloud
vendors have been doing it for decades
and they're really good at it and
they're having a hard time then
competing
we started from the beginning just you
know walking on our hands so we only had
a sas offering in the cloud and we were
good at it from the get go so we can
compete with the cloud vendors
uh making sure that the reliability the
performance the security the upgrades
all that is seamless and that's really
really hard to do
so that's why i use this analogy
so i think that's really the fundamental
difference and then that's why you see
people
saying oh this is so hard in the cloud
maybe we should lock down the license or
something right yes to prevent the cloud
vendors from uh from doing this you know
um
but you don't have to if you're actually
good at this and and
i mean you solved a very difficult
problem for customers and you added
great value by offering it as a cloud
service and in the age of cloud do you
think open source is dead or or not gone
away or
uh will it will it diminish in uh
importance not at all i think open
source is here to stay
in fact i think uh
open source has the potential to replace
pretty much any software that's any
proprietary software that exists on the
planet today uh is you know in a really
vulnerable state in the sense that it
can be disrupted by an open source
version right back in the day people
would say
operating systems are really complicated
like you have to have phds and really
sort of skilled people to write an
operating system and that's nobody's
going to be able to so you can't open
source that but linux showed that you
can actually even open source the
hardest most complicated software
you know we we're seeing that the same
thing is happening in the data stack
right so there's a modern data stack
appearing that where we're open sourcing
it and bit by bit i think uh the
proprietary pieces that exist in the
modern data stack are going to be
disrupted by open source so i think it's
on the contrary and if you look at
companies getting funded now in silicon
valley
most
successful projects get funding
immediately most successful open source
projects get funding really really easy
and i had a close friend of mine who was
actually trying to raise money recently
and they had they have amazing people
they had amazing idea and you know they
i introduced them to mvcs and they did
not get funding and when i asked them
hey what happened these people are you
know really really good and say well
they didn't have an open source project
they don't really have any sort of
customers yet we didn't want to take a
risk
so with so much investment going towards
these open source projects that are
successful i think we're going to see
much more of it in the future i i
completely agree with you i think
people will innovate on open source and
as the
projects get more popular that's where
uh you know the commercial support for
the project or even the cloud vendors
are picking you know winners from open
source but someone has to start the
innovation and open source innovates so
fast and globally and and it's very very
exciting to me you have to start
somewhere and then you can yeah yeah in
fact you can think of it this way aws
took a lot of open source technology
offered it as a service yes right uh but
someone had created those open source
projects exactly and we've shown you can
actually do that we we hosted our own
spark service in the cloud and we
competed well with the cloud vendors so
i think there's actually huge
opportunity in the future all these
different services you need in the
clouds
you can start them
and you can offer them as a service in
the cloud that's what's going to happen
in the future and the new companies that
are coming along now won't have some of
the struggles
of the companies of the past that
created open source software because
they'll be cloud native they'll start in
the cloud and they already know how to
walk on their hands exactly and and i
think you did some other things right
and and there are other advantages for
you which is your multi-cloud and you
support hybrid cloud and you're not just
stuck with one public cloud and that
helps customers who are all kind of
going hybrid and adopting multiple
clouds yeah that's the important trend
today yeah two years ago people would
ask about it
now
sort of the requirements are becoming
louder and louder that we we don't want
to just be in one cloud we want to be
able to run it anywhere um and i think
this is a secular trend so in a couple
years i think it's going to be an
absolute requirement like i don't want
to if your software only works on this
cloud yes i'm not sure i'm just going to
be in this cloud some of my customers
might not want to run in this cloud they
might mandate to run over there or if
you have an international business
the clouds are not all equally popular
in different parts of the world so you
know in asia i might want to use one
cloud in europe another one in the u.s a
third one
so i want to make sure the software that
you provide works anywhere
so that's why i think multi-cloud is
going to become more and more and that
you're going to see huge tailwind for
companies that are multi-cloud like us
and others that are going to also pop up
actually
and and you also gave some really good
advice to uh companies
that didn't start in the cloud you know
you can't really play with licenses and
expect to win um it it i what i've seen
is it doesn't work um people just don't
like the fact that you have you know um
polluted a license or you're not setting
the right expectations
uh you have to innovate and you have to
deliver services on the cloud we have
about four minutes before uh we go to
the conclusion i really love what you're
doing with ml flow and coalesce and
the whole machine learning problem set
what is the problem that enterprises are
facing in machine learning uh with all
the massive data sets that they have and
how are you helping solve that whole
workflow yeah um
the problem is really you know to get to
machine learning to get to those really
interesting use cases where you automate
everything there's a lot of hard work
you have to do on the data side
and actually you have to do data and ai
together really well that's what google
facebook airbnb twitter and these guys
did really well
they built custom platforms internally
using thousands of thousands of
engineers
that really enabled not just one data
team in the company to succeed they
enabled the whole company to use data
and ai if you look at an uber or a
facebook or google they wouldn't be here
today if it wasn't for ai that's right
and the whole company uses it right
enterprises they're not quite there they
have one data team
and they sort of you know they're
trying to either build it themselves but
they don't have the resources or uh
they're trying to buy
a software from vendors and
unfortunately the space today is divided
into two types of software
ai software that's not so great for data
so it doesn't really have data
capabilities there's lots of companies
that provide machine learning
capabilities but they have no data
processing capabilities
and then you have data vendors that
provide you data processing and they're
good at that but they have no ai
capabilities and you really need both so
what we're trying to do is give one
platform where you can do all of these
things in one place
that way you can bring the whole
organization to the platform because in
a large organization you'll have data
engineers you'll have data scientists
you have business analysts and then you
have sort of domain experts in the
business you have administrators
you want all of them to be able to use
the platform
so we're trying to sort of build that
stack and open source each piece of it
as we go along
that's kind of the vision so when we
started with spark that's just a way to
get the data
and then we moved to delta delta enabled
you to basically get reliability and the
kind of enterprise capabilities you need
to make the data really fast
ml flow enables you to do machine
learning uh and there's actually other
projects like re-dash and so on that
we've open source for visualization and
other things so we're trying to build up
this whole
analytics stack in an open way uh for
enterprises
that's that's fantastic i i
know at comcast we
have tons of voice commands millions and
millions of voice commands where people
are using natural language to do queries
and say hey can you show me all the
movies uh that pierce brosnan did or
whatever and and then i think your magic
at the back helps us kind of get to
the right results yeah it's uh i really
like the comcast example the basically
you speak to the post remote
the audio goes in it goes into a
databricks lake house it actually gets
processed by a flow and then it's stored
in the delta lake and then you know they
do the synthesizing and figuring out
what the commands are and so the whole
thing gets orchestrated and you know you
might take it for granted but it just
works you know you can just speak to it
and it uses it leverages actually all
these different components that's what i
like about it is that it actually it's
not just do it yeah it goes through all
of the whole you know pipeline so uh
very excited about actually there's a
really great talk that i think jim
forsyth at comcast gave at spark summit
one a couple years ago on how that
exactly works so i can encourage people
to watch it i i love that example
because customers you know want to speak
naturally and not have to kind of
remember which channel to go to or which
movies to go to et cetera so that's a
really good example and i know you've
also helped pharmaceutical companies
arrive at better
you know
drug results which are so expensive and
shell company help them kind of find oil
resources
um and just really accelerate the path
to results and predictive yeah last year
was pretty cool with
the vaccine development they don't want
to talk openly about it but most of
those vaccine teams behind the scenes
built basically what we call like house
we stole all your data store all your
data and do ai on it and it was really
used for this sort of vaccine
development both here and in europe so
it's exciting to see how the technology
is actually now starting to
uh impact these businesses in a in a
serious way that was not the case 2012
when we started
it was ai was sort of a
cool idea
but enterprises were so far away from
getting these use cases in production
and now it's becoming super strategic
for really large companies that you
would not think i i love that you
democratized ai if you will
only the really big companies like
google and and
facebook could afford it now
all enterprises can have access to those
kinds of magic
um so that's that's really fantastic
i am going to actually go to
the takeaways
and summarize the takeaway since we have
about three and a half minutes
um first of all i think open source is
here to stay that's where all the
innovation happens and then it moves
forward and is used to productize by
various companies and you know put
commercial and enterprise grade support
and sas behind it
there's been billions of dollars i think
anywhere between i'm hearing numbers
like 15 to 30 billion so i used a larger
number uh here there's a lot of money
going into open source based companies
as ali was also saying and it's just
growing
the category that someone has created is
called commercial open source and that's
what they call it
successful exits are happening every day
which
really is a remarkable thing it says
that this model is mature and there are
strong business models like sas sas i
think is one of the the biggest uh
business models because there's a
tremendous value add and the software
problems of installing and running uh
open source is taken away and the last
thing is i i think ali and a lot of
companies that do it well
really do a good job of working with
community because community helps them
adopt the solution evangelize the
solution bring it into
enterprises and
frankly recommend the solution to
enterprises it also helps do more
innovations and contributions
and what i like about what databricks
has done is
most of these projects are in a neutral
home like the apache foundation all the
linux foundation where a lot of
companies can contribute i think
companies even competitors right
contribute and and kind of collaborate
at the project level and then
you can compete separately at the
product level uh in a in a different way
any any other conclusions or points to
add here
to the conclusions no this makes a lot
of sense i i think the
sas model applied to open source
uh is going to be really disruptive and
you know so people because of this
transition period we had these on-prem
open source vendors people think maybe
open source won't work in the future in
the cloud but i think people are going
to see that slowly you're going to find
lots of companies like databricks that
open source technology and then offer it
as a sas service and they're going to be
the ones that are going to be dominant
in this
new sort of sas era so i think so too i
think that's the way to
i mean open source let's face it it's
highly highly innovative but it often
has rough edges in terms of
operationalizing it or doing it
enterprise scale or enterprise grade and
the sas model takes away all of those
rough edges and makes it easy to use and
go straight to the functionality and
straight to that
and and to be honest
we need to continue
investing in a sas model to compete in a
very cloud world
so i i love what you're doing
if uh i just want to thank you ali it's
been fantastic talking with you this
morning and and really showcasing a
company that's doing open source right
is working with community is also
innovating continuously
and is uh serving enterprise customers
like my company um and it's a pleasure
to be here this morning thank you so
much thanks for having me thank you
[Music]
you